Over the years, a number of popular songs
have romanticized divorce.
But anyone who has personally experienced
the pain and trauma associated with divorce
knows that it couldn’t have been part
of Jehovah’s original purpose.
And, in fact,
the Scriptures indicate
that when Jehovah performed
the first marriage
of Adam and Eve,
He intended for it
to be a permanent arrangement.
After all,
it was a match made in heaven,
so to speak.
Jehovah created the man,
and then He created the perfect complement
—Eve.
And had they been obedient,
Adam and Eve would be married today.
But with their disobedience
came a whole range of serious problems,
and they impacted the marriage arrangement.
In what way?
Well, with imperfection came sin
and then death.
And death ends a marriage.
That’s something Jehovah never had in mind.
And further indicating the complications
and negative effects
of imperfection on marriage
is the provision for divorce
found in the Mosaic Law
at Deuteronomy 24:1.
So here’s a question:
Did the fact
that Jehovah made a provision for divorce
in the Mosaic Law
indicate that he was relaxing his view
or that he had changed
his thinking on marriage?
Well, in his words as recorded
at Malachi 2:16,
more than 1,000 years
after the words recorded
in Deuteronomy 24,
we find that Jehovah
had not changed his thinking.
He stated very simply:
“I hate divorce.”
Now, what was the situation in Malachi’s day?
The provision for divorce
had been distorted and abused,
and men were divorcing their wives
“on every sort of grounds,”
resulting in heartbreak
and also in reproach on Jehovah’s name.
“I hate divorce.”
We can see why
Jehovah would have said those words.
Had the situation improved any
by the time of Jesus’ earthly ministry?
The Scriptures indicate not.
And interestingly,
the secular historian Josephus
indicates that men
could divorce their wives
on any basis whatsoever,
and they did.
So, true to form,
Jesus forthrightly addressed the subject
at least twice
in the course of his earthly ministry,
as recorded in the Scriptures.
The first occasion took place
in the year 31 C.E.
sometime after Passover.
Jesus’ words are recorded
in the Sermon on the Mount.
And there he said:
‘Everyone who divorces his wife,
‘except on the grounds of sexual immorality,
‘and marries another
commits adultery.’
Jesus was raising the bar.
Really, when you think about it,
under the Mosaic Law,
sexual immorality
(adultery)
was a capital offense
that would have brought death.
So the fact
that Jesus said sexual immorality
is the only basis for divorce
helps us to appreciate
how seriously he and his Father view
the marriage arrangement.
Now, the second occasion
in which Jesus addressed the subject
came more than a year later
—late in the year 32 C.E.
And that’s the account
that we read about in today’s text.
The parallel account in Mark chapter 10
shares some additional insight.
And we want to take
just a few minutes this morning
and analyze Jesus’ words
in Mark chapter 10,
beginning in verse 2.
So we invite you to turn there.
At Mark 10:2,
the “Pharisees approached,
intent on testing [Jesus],
“and they asked whether it was lawful
for a man to divorce a wife.”
So now the Pharisees
are introducing the thought of the law,
but Mark reveals that Jesus
directed attention specifically
to the Mosaic Law.
“What did Moses command you?”
And the Pharisees said:
“Moses allowed the writing
of a certificate of dismissal
and divorcing her.”
So they conveniently remembered
the “certificate of dismissal” part,
but they forgot that divorce was allowed
only for very serious matters.
And Matthew’s account
indicates that by Jesus’ day,
they were divorcing
“on every sort of grounds.”
So how did Jesus address this?
Well, he said to them in verse 5:
“Out of regard for your hard-heartedness,
“he wrote this commandment for you.
“However, from the beginning of creation
“[and then you’ll notice a quotation mark;
“so Jesus is now quoting
from the Genesis account],
“‘He made them male and female
“‘[Genesis 1:27].
“‘For this reason a man
will leave his father and his mother,
“‘and the two will be one flesh
[Genesis 2:24].’”
And then Jesus adds:
“So that they are no longer two,
but one flesh.
“Therefore, what God has yoked together,
let no man put apart.”
Well, the disciples were impressed
by this very high standard
that Jesus was explaining.
“When they were again in the house,
[they] began to question him about this.”
And Jesus again forthrightly makes the point:
“He said to them:
“‘Whoever divorces his wife
and marries another
“‘commits adultery against her,
“‘and if ever a woman
“‘after divorcing her husband
marries another,
she commits adultery.’”
Why do you think Jesus
might have insisted
that the Pharisees focus on Moses’ words?
Well, it certainly provided him
an opportunity
to clarify the matter
—didn’t it?—
and to restate Jehovah’s thinking
on the sacredness of marriage.
And Jesus added these words:
“What God has yoked together,
let no man put apart.”
So Jehovah is personally interested
in each marriage.
And that elevates the relationship as well,
doesn’t it?
So, what can you and I learn
from Jesus’ words
that will help us
if we’re married
or if we’re single
and contemplating marriage?
Here are two points:
Jesus made very clear
that his followers would be elevated
and hold to Jehovah’s original standard
for marriage,
not the corrupted standard
that the Jewish religious leaders promoted.
And by introducing this thought
that Jehovah is involved,
he helped us to see
the seriousness of the situation.
And the apostle Paul,
in his letter to the Ephesians,
confirmed that Christians would hold
to Jehovah’s original standard
for a man and a wife
and that the only valid basis
for a Scriptural divorce
would be sexual immorality.
Here’s a second point:
Jesus put Christian men and women
on equal footing,
morally speaking.
Both husband and wife would be responsible
for protecting their marriage
and for upholding the sanctity of marriage.
And we find Jesus’ words at Mark 10:12
interesting as well:
“If ever a woman after divorcing her husband
marries another,
she commits adultery.”
Jesus makes clear
that a faithful servant of God
who is a woman
can divorce an adulterous husband.
That would have been food for thought
for Jewish men and women in Jesus’ day.
How we appreciate
Jesus’ view and Jehovah’s view of marriage!
Here at Bethel,
we have many married couples.
And in the congregations around the earth,
there are faithful men and women
who respect and cherish
the sanctity of marriage.
And we’re so glad for that,
and we’re determined
—whether married or single—
to uphold Jehovah’s view
of the sacred marriage arrangement.